The topic modeling discussed in chapter (?) provided me with some preliminary ideas of the relationship between Aristarchus and the intermarginal zone. Specifically, the topic modeling results showed that scholia featuring Aristarchus appear significantly more frequently in this zone. However, I decided to continue exploring this relation of the Alexandrian editors to scholia zones and to critical signs. 

The two features which I first chose to examine together more thoroughly were references to Zenodotus and occurrences of dotted diples. As I explained in the introduction, a dotted diple next to a line indicates that Zenodotus's and Aristarchus's readings of the line differ. Thus I wished to see how frequently these two features co-occurr in order to observe the strength of this relationship.

In order to do this, I first had to identify every reference to Zenodotus in the scholia. This was easy to do because of the HMT's use of personal name URNs for every person mentioned in the Iliadic text and scholia. I next obtained the scholia URN for each of the scholia in which these Zenodotus references appeared. I then shortened this list to include only distinct scholia. If I did not do this, then certain URNs would appear multiple times in the instances in which Zenodotus was mentioned more than once in a single scholion. I then obtained the *Iliad* line numbers on which each of these distinct scholia were commenting. I compared this list of line numbers with the line numbers which had dotted diples next to them. The results, broken down by scholia type, can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/zenodotusScholia.csv). 

It is important to look at these features by scholia type because there are significant differences in the amounts of each type of scholia. Slightly less than half (44%) of the 286 main scholia which reference Zenodotus are commenting on lines which have dotted diples next to them. The intermarginal and interior scholia contain fewer references to Zenodotus (75 and 23, respectively), as well as lower percentages of corresponding dotted diples (22% and 30%, respectively). Zenodotus scholia make up about 8% of all main scholia, 6% of all intermarginal scholia, and a little less than 3% of all interior scholia. Only six interlinear scholia reference Zenodotus, and there are no mentions of him at all in the exterior scholia. In total, there are 298 dotted diples in the Venetus A manuscript. 46% of them appear next to lines which have Zenodotus scholia commenting on them. This analysis shows that there is indeed a strong connection between this editor and this sign, but they do not always occur together. In addition, it reveals that the explanation for the dotted diple most frequently appears to be in the main scholia. This is something which can be explored more thoroughly when I analyze specific phrases, rather than just names, in the scholia. 

Before I began this thesis, I had previously briefly examined the appearance of Zenodotus with dotted diples over a small sample size of three books (17, 18, 19) of the Venetus A. A common way to begin scholia connected to critical signs is “ἡ διπλη ὅτι” (the sign is there because) or simply just "ὅτι" ([the sign is there] because). Scholia which correspond to dotted diples frequently reference Zenodotus with the phrase "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος γράφει” ([the sign is there] because Zenodotus writes...), introducing the disagreement between Zenodotus and Aristarchus. However, this is not the only formula for citing Zenodotus. The form "παρά Ζηνοδότῳ" also occurs throughout the scholia, yet it does not seem to be associated with any critical sign.

Of the nineteen occurrences of "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" in books 17-19 of the Venetus A, only two appear in scholia which have corresponding critical signs, neither of which are dotted diples. However, 22 of the 24 occurrences of "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος γράφει" in this sample coincide with a critical sign. This observations suggests that "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος γράφει" is Aristarchan language. That is, it was transmitted along with the dotted diples, which Dindorf tells us are signs unique to Aristarchus. This leaves the question of the "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" formula. Because it does not appear to coincide with any critical sign, we cannot assume that it is Aristarchan language. This formula perhaps comes from a separate source. In order to obtain a better idea of what this different citation pattern means, it is necessary to analyze its usage throughout a larger sample size of books. By examining every occurrence of "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" throughout 18 books of the Venetus A and keeping track of each scholion’s zone and whether is has a corresponding critical sign, I will gain  a more thorough understanding of how this formula is used and if it seems to be specific to a type of comment.

I first decided to continue my analysis of Zenodotus scholia and dotted diples. I narrowed the observations down to the co-occurence of dotted diples with scholia which contain the phrase "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος" ("the sign is there because Zenodotus..."). I chose this formula rather than the longer "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος γράφει" ("the sign is there because Zenodotus writes") because, due to the condensed nature of the scholia language, the verb "γράφει" is sometimes omitted. This two-word phrase still contains the important feature which I am trying to isolate in this analysis: an explanation based on Zenodotus. I then extracted the instances of this phrase in the scholia and obtained the line URN for each of these. Then, I compared this against the list of lines with dotted diples next to them. There are 220 instances of "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος" in the scholia, and 142 of these occur in scholia which are commenting on lines marked with the dotted diple. Thus this pattern of language occurs very frequently with this critical sign. However, this does mean that there are some instances where there is an explanatory scholia with no corresponding dotted diple. There are twenty Zenodotus scholia which are commenting on lines with plain, undotted diples. This shows that this formula is not reserved only for the dotted diple, but it does seem to be associated with it more often than not. 

I next chose to continue the preliminary observations I had made about the separate formula for citing Zenodotus, "παρα Ζηνοδότῳ." I first extracted every instance of this phrase in the scholia. An index of these scholia URNs along with the line they comment on can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/paraZenod.csv). There are 27 scholia which contain this pattern, 22 of which have this phrase as the first two words in the scholia. Moreover, none of these 27 scholia is commenting on lines which have dotted diples next to them. That is, it appears that Zenodotus is only associated with dotted diples when he is referenced with the formula "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος." This is precisely what the earlier investigation done on a smaller sample size had suggested.

With respect to other critical signs, two of these scholia comment on lines with diples next to them, two have both an asteriskos and an obelos, and one has just an obelos. What is even more interesting is 17 of these 27 "παρα Ζηνοδότῳ" scholia are from book 18. In order to get a better understanding of this finding, I decided to examine the content of these scholia. A list of rough translations for each of these scholia can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/paraZenodotusBk18.md). Four of these scholia reference Aristophanes as well, and each of these times, he is in agreement with Zenodotus. Aristarchus, on the other hand, appears in only one scholion containing the phrase "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ." This is one of the two scholia in this set which has a corresponding diple. The fact that so few of these scholia have corresponding critical signs and that Aristarchus is mostly absent from them indicates that this formula perhaps comes from a later reworking of an Aristarchan source. Even the one scholion that does reference Aristarchus and has a diple does not seem to be typical Aristarchan language. Here, after Zenodotus' reading is given, it states that "Aristarchus does not wish for it to say..." That is, rather than directly say, "Aristarchus has," it makes a statement about what he wishes. It is unclear at this point what the exact significance of this language is, but one possibility is that the comment corresponding to the critical sign was lost, and thus the scholion is not taken directly from an Aristarchan source. A more thorough analysis on the usage of "βούλομαι" and the other verbs which occur frequently with Aristarchus' name must be conducted in order to understand the implication of this scholion. 

The remainder of these book 18 "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" scholia simply provide the word or phrase that appears in Zenodotus' edition. In each of these instances, his reading differs from what is in the main text in the manuscript. However, on a few of these instances, the scholion also comments that the reading from Zenodotus' edition is "not unreasonable" or "not unlikely." Thus this formula does not seem to be reserved for readings regarded as not Homeric or unreasonable. While the “ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος" formula indicates a disagreement between Zenodotus and Aristarchus, the "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" formula simply appears to reflect alternate readings without a specific disagreement with another editor. 

Half of the scholia which contain the phrase "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" are main scholia. Four of the non-main "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" scholia are commenting on lines which also have main scholia commenting on them. However, the content of these scholia must be compared in order to understand the relationship between them. 

This analysis did not provide any explanation for why this formula appears disproportionately more in book 18 than in any other book of the Venetus A. Zenodotus does not seem to appear more frequently in this book than in others. One possiblity for the prominence of this pattern of language in book 18 is that Zenodotus's edition of book 18 had especially more multiforms than in other books. Book 18 concerns the shield, which contains a great deal of description. It is perhaps possible that something highly descriptive would have more variation across different versions. However, rather than dive further into speculation, I will return to more analysis. 

The peculiar distribution of "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" convinved me to examine the preposition "παρὰ" more closely. Specifically, I wanted to see if it appeared closely with any other editor. The phrase "παρὰ Ἀρισταρχῳ" does not appear anywhere in the scholia, while "παρά Ἀριστοφάνει" occurs 10 times, with no specific book monopolizing the pattern. Because of the co-occurrences of Zenodotus and Aristophanes that appeared when examining the "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" scholia, I decided to take a closer look at references to Aristophanes. A table containing the frequency of references to Aristophanes by scholia type can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/AristophanesScholia.csv). Also included in this table is how many times Zenodotus also appears in a scholion mentioning Arostophanes. In the main scholia, 45% of Aristophanes scholia also feature Zenodotus. In the intermarginal, this ratio is even higher, at 52%. Overall, Zenodotus appears in 44% of all scholia which reference Aristophanes. In order to make a more definitive statement on the nature of this relationship, it is necessary to examine how frequently these two editors are referenced as being in agreement. Nevertheless, it is clear that when Aristophanes is mentioned, Zenodotus is often referenced as well.

I next decided to examine a different Alexandrian editor: Aristarchus. Specifically, I looked at the relationship between Aristarchus and the diple (undotted). The diple's purpose is much broader than that of the dotted diple. It simply indicates that the line it is next to contains some interesting language usage. The results of this analysis, again broken down by scholia type, can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/AristarchusScholia.csv). There are only 35 more scholia which reference Aristarchus in the main than in the intermarginal (271 and 236 references, respectively). This is significant considering there are over 2000 more main scholia than there are intermarginal scholia. Thus Aristarchus scholia comprise 7.5% of main scholia, but 19% of the intermarginal scholia. There are 104 interior scholia which reference Zenodotus, making up 12.6% of the interior scholia. In total, Aristarchus makes more appearances than Zenodotus, as there are 615 Aristarchus scholia and 390 Zenodotus scholia. However, the lines which Aristarchus scholia comment on do not as frequently have co-occurring diples. The Aristarchus scholia in the main, intermarginal, and interior zones comment on lines which have diples next to them around 22% of the time (25% main, 20% intermarginal, 21% interior). These results show that Aristarchus has a stronger presence in the scholia, but he is not as strongly correlated with the diple as Zenodotus is with the dotted diple. However, the fact that Aristarchus scholia comprise a significant portion of all intermarginal scholia coincides with the topic modeling results, which revealed that a majority of the scholia which relate strongly to the Aristarchus category fall in the intermarginal zone. This observations builds an even stronger case for the possibility of an Aristarchan source that was used for the intermarginal scholia. 

Another area I hope to explore is the instances of obeloi in the manuscript and the scholia which correspond to them. As Wolf notes, Aristarchus “was the most severe of all in exercising his function [of the obelos].” Thus it might prove useful to extract all of the scholia which correspond to obeloi and see if there is a common way of explaining the presence of the obelos. From an initial, cursory glance, it appears that athetized lines do not contain as many “ὅτι” scholia as do lines with diples or dotted diples. However, I must examine the obeloi over a larger collection of books in order to confirm this or understand the significance.

---

I also wanted to examine the frequency of usage of critical signs across all of the books in the Venetus A. A table of critical sign type by book can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/criticalSignByBook.csv). This table also provides the number of Iliadic lines in each book. It is important to note that there are a 19 replacement folios which contain only the text of the Iliad and which have no scholia or critical signs. These replacement folios are in books 5, 17, 19, and 24. For these four books, the line number counts provided in the table are the differences of the total line numbers and the number of lines on the replacement folios. Thus one can get a better idea of the ratio in each book of each critical sign to the number of lines on which there can possibly be critical signs. 

One of the most striking observations to be drawn from this analysis is the contrast in frequency of dotted diples in the first several books compared to in the last few. Especially after book 16, there appear to be dramatically fewer dotted diples in the manuscript. There is no apparent similar pattern for diple distribution. Nevertheless, the distribution of dotted diples raises some questions about this critical sign.
