To reiterate, the driving question of this thesis is that of the source material for the scholia of the Venetus A. The way I have chosen to approach this is through the lens of the Alexandrian editors, and specifically Aristarchus. My goal in this thesis is not to claim that I have found an infallible indicator of what comments come from what editor. However, I intend to put together a significant collection of features which help identify what type of language (i.e. Aristarchan, post-Aristarchan) a scholion contains. In order to be able to classify a scholion as Aristarchan or non-Aristarachan, it is necessary first to define what an Aristarchan scholion entails. That is, what features are associated with language directly from Aristarchus' editions? 
 
 In the previous chapter, I presented several different analyses of different features of the scholia. In this chapter, I will select several features which most strongly represent either Aristarchan material or post-Aristarchan material. The features which I have decided to use in my analysis have been chosen based on what I know about the transmission of the scholia and the patterns that I have seen while working on the Homer Multitext project and while analyzing my preliminary data in the previous chapter. I will give a brief description of each of these significant features before examining them altogether.

The first Aristarchan feature is the appearance of critical signs. As we know from Dindorf, these signs are unique to Aristarchus. His edition likely consisted of two separate documents, one with the text of the Iliad, and one with his comments. Thus the critical signs were especially helpful for his readers, as it would notify them to check the commentary whenever they arrived at a line with a critical sign. Because he included these signs in his own edition and they were transmitted along with the text, we can assume that the presence of a critical sign on a line indicates that a scholion on that same line, and especially one which makes a reference to the sign, is Aristarchan material. In the previous chapter, I explored the different types of critical signs more thoroughly. While these inquiries into the difference in functions between the diple and the dotted diple yielded interesting information, there was nothing in the results to indicate that each critical signs should each be treated as their own separate feature. Because they are known as Aristarchan critical signs, it is reasonable to assume that the appearance of any one of them on a line indicates an Aristarchan trace. Next, I will discuss specific words and patterns of language which accompany this critical signs. 

The "hoti" formula refers to a common way of beginning a scholion. "ὅτι" (transliterated into English as "hoti"), meaning "because," is often the first word of a scholion wich is commenting on a line which has a critical sign on it. It is meant to explain the presence of the sign. This formula, as explained in the previous chapter, stands for "The sign is there because." Because this word occurs so frequently with critical signs, it is likely that it was transmitted with the signs and is therefore Aristarchus' own way of explaining why he placed a critical sign next to a line in his edition. In the previous chapter, I examined the two-word phrase "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος." However, I decided that this exact phrase might be too limiting, as many scholia can be "hoti" scholia without mentioning Zenodotus. Thus I decided instead to consider all scholia which begin with the word "ὅτι" as an Aristarchan feature. 

Another significant word which appears frequently in conjunction with critical signs is an active form of the verb γράφω (to write). In the scholia, this verb is almost always governed by Zenodotus. That is, he is the only person who is said to write, using this specific verb. Moreover, this formula of "Ζηνόδοτος γράφει" is one which commonly appears in hoti scholia. Because of critical signs' and hoti scholia's link to Aristarchus, the presence of an active form of γράφω can also be considered an Aristarchan feature. 

Next, I will consider features which suggest post-Aristarchan material. It also follows that, as post-Aristarchan indicators, the absence of these features in a scholion suggests (but certainly does not confirm) an Aristarchan source. Most of these post-Aristarchan features rely on personal name references. This is logical, as an easy way to indicate whether a comment is made before or after a certain time period is to discern if there are references to people who lived after the time period in question. The first of these post-Aristarchan features, however, concerns Zenodotus, who was Aristarchus' predecessor at the Library of Alexandria.

A reference to Zenodotus *can* be an indicator of Aristarchan material. However, it depends on with what formula he is referenced. If it is "ὅτι Ζηνόδοτος...", as mentioned above, then the scholion is likely to be Aristarchan. On the other hand, if the name Zenodotus appears in the form "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ," then we cannot assume that this is Aristarchan. This is because, as described in the previous analysis chapter, this formula does not appear to be associated with any critical signs. The same can be said about references to Aristophanes. The phrase "παρὰ Ἀριστοφάνει" also appears several times throughout the scholia, with no strong association with critical signs. For this reason, the presence of Zenodotus is not a feature which will be taken into account in this analysis, as it can be both Aristarchan and post-Aristarchan. However, the two-word phrase "παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ" will be used as a post-Aristarchan feature. 

The presence of Aristarchus' name himself is likely an indication that the scholion is post-Aristarchan. This is based on the assumption that Aristarchus was not writing in the third person about himself. This assumption is strengthened by the observation I made in the previous chapter about Aristarchus' name not appearing with notable frequency in conjunction with critical signs. Rather, Aristarchus' predecessors appear much more frequently in the scholia which are connected with the critical signs, as Aristarchus disagreed with them in these scholia. Thus the presence of Aristarchus' name in a scholion indicates some scholar at a later time writing about him and his work on the *Iliad*.

In a similar vein, the presence of a post-Aristarchan scholar's name obviously indicates that the scholion is taken from a source that is later than Aristarchus. A more in depth discussion of how the list of post-Aristarchan scholars was compiled can be found below.

With all of these Aristarchan and post-Aristarchan features in mind, I gathered the boolean value for each of these features for every scholion in the main, intermarginal, and interior scholia. I have decided to exclude the interlinear scholia from this analysis because they very rarely reference editors, as they are often single-word glosses. Additionally, I chose to exclude the exterior scholia because there are relatively few of them (240), and they also typically do not contain any editorial discussion and do not reference editors. 

In order to complete this process of gathering all of these features systematically, I wrote a script which goes through every scholion and checks whether it does or does not contain the given features I have selected for this analysis. Certain features were more difficult than others to isolate. For example, in order to check which scholia contained a reference to post-Aristarchan scholars, I first had to determine who the post-Aristarchan scholars were. The Homer Multitext's authority list of all of the names referenced in the Venetus A contains 1098 entries. I was able automatically to extract only the names which appear in the scholia. However, this still left 631 names. In order to create a list of post-Aristarchan scholars mentioned in the scholia, I had to manually go through each name and consider their time-period in relation to Aristarchus. Some of the names, such as Iliadic characters and other fictional people, were easy to eliminate. However, this process required a fair amount of research, as some ancient grammarians are especially obscure. However, after sifting through all 631, I arrived at a list of 44 names of people whom I could confidently place as being later than Aristarchus. There were a few instances of people who were contemporary with Aristarchus. In these cases, I decided to exclude them from the list, as I do not know with any certainty whether Aristarchus himself wrote about his contemporaries in his own editions. Thus this list is reserved for those who are purely post-Aristarchan. In my original version of the script, I placed Aristarchus himself in the list as well. However, I later decided to remove his name, making two separate features: the presence of the name Aristarchus and the presence of the name of a post-Aristarchan scholar. 

Two other features I decided to include in this analysis were topic modeling scores, which I touched upon in the previous chapter. I decided to obtain the scores for each scholion for two distinct topics: topic 6 and topic 9. Topic 6 consists of words which are strongly associated with Aristarchan language, such as "Ζηνόδοτος," “γράφω," and "ἀθετέω." Athetesis (ἀθετέω) is the act of regarding a line as spurious, which I explained in the introduction as being one of Aristarchus' defining acts as an editor. Thus it follows that scholia which contain high scores for topic 6 would contain language which is similar to that of Aristarchus himself. 

Topic 9 consists of words used to discuss Aristarchus, his editions, and other editors. The most freuqently occurring words in this topic are Aristarchus, Zenodotus, χωρις  (without), and Aristophanes. Thus we can consider this topic as post-Aristarchan due to the strong presence of Aristarchus himself in it. It follows that scholia which contain high scores for topic 9 would contain language of a post-Aristarchan source or reworking of his editions. The scores, as I explained in the previous chapter, range from 0.0-1.0, with 0.0 being not at all related, and 1.0 being 100% related. I decided to include these scores in the list of features because I wanted to see how they corresponded to the presence or absence of other Aristarchan features. Thus my final list of features which I chose to extract for each scholion are 

1. The presence of a critical sign on the line on which the scholion comments
2. The presence of γράφει, the 3rd person singular active form of γράφω 
3. The presence of ὅτι as the first word in the scholion
4. The presence of παρὰ Ζηνοδότῳ
5. The presence of the name Aristarchus
6. The presence of the name of a post-Aristarchan scholar
7. The Topic 6 score for the scholion
8. The topic 9 score for the scholion

To call this a list of Aristarchan features is misleading, as it is a mix of features which indicate Aristarchan language and which indicate the opposite. Thus it is more appropriate to refer to this as a list of features which point toward or away from Aristarchus. Items 1-3 on the list are all features which are positively associated with Aristarchan language. That is, The presence of the boolean value "true" for any one of these features on a scholion increases its likelihood of containing Aristarchan language. Itmes 4-6 are all features which are negatively associated with Aristarchan language. That is, the presence of the boolean value "true" for any one of these features on a scholion decreases its likelihood of containing Aristarchan language. The last two features, the topic modeling scores are continuous variables and thus the only non-boolean ones, but their function is not terribly different. If a scholion's score is closer to 1, that means that it is "more true" that its language matches that of the topic. A higher score for Topic 6 indicates that the language of the scholion aligns more with the language of the Aristarchan language topic, whereas a higher score for Topic 9 indicates that the language of the scholion aligns more with he language of the topic which talks about Aristarchus. 

The files containing the value for every feature for each scholion in the main, intermarginal, and interior zones can be found here: [main](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/aristarchanFeaturesData/updated-msA-Aristarchan.tsv), [intermarginal](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/aristarchanFeaturesData/updated-msAim-Aristarchan.tsv), [interior](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/aristarchanFeaturesData/updated-msAint-Aristarchan.tsv). In addition, a table with the sums of the occurrences of these features by scholia type can be found [here](https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/aristarchanFeaturesData/scholia-features2.csv). 

This table shows the significance of having "presence of the name Aristarchus" as a feature. Aristarchus appears in 7.6% of main scholia, whereas this name appears in 19% of intermarginal scholia and 13% interior scholia. This corroborates what the topic modeling results revealed. That is, this shows that scholia which mention Aristarchus appear with disproportiate frequency in the intermarginal zone. The post-Aristarchan name feature also shows an interesting pattern across the scholia types. Of the 264 scholia which contain the name of a post-Aristarchan editor, 238 of these fall in the main zone. This indicates that scholia which use post-Aristarchan sources are most frequently main scholia. 

This table also provides the amount of scholia in each zone which have scores above .5 and .9 for both topic 6 and topic 9. The most immediate difference here is that 18% of the intermarginal scholia have scores above .5 for topic 9. This is significantly greater than the proportion of main scholia with scores above .5 for this same topic (3.5%). This observation, just as the previous one, further suggests the connection of the intermarginal zone with scholia which reference Aristarchus. In addition, the sum of the topic 6 scores for all of the main scholia is roughly twice the sum of the topic 9 scores for all of the main scholia. On the other hand, the sums of the topic 9 scores for all of the intermarginal and interior scholia were roughly twice the respectives sums of their topic 6 scores. This shows that the main scholia have higher topic 9 scores and lower topic 6 scores, while the intermarginal and interior scholia are the opposite. Using these scores as features in the analysis add valuable information about the scholia. 

Another piece of information provided in this table is how many scholia in each zone contain all of the Aristarchan features and none of the post-Aristarchan features. This is defined as a scholion having a value of true for items 1-3 on the feature list, and a value of false for items 4-6. I chose not to include topic model scores in this definition for the sake of simplicity, as it was unclear what value I should define as being a "high" score. In the row "All Aristarchan Features," the amount of scholia which meet all of these criteria for each of the main, intermarginal, and interior zones can be seen. The main scholia have 113 (3%) scholia in this category, whereas the intermarginal have 14 (1%), and the interior 9 (1%). While these percentages show that the main scholia contain more scholia with all Aristarchan features, they are not terribly dramatic. This suggests that scholia zones are too simplistic a way to attempt to determine source content.

The ultimate goal for this data is to create an Aristarchan classifier which is able to take a scholion and determine (as best it can) if the language in it is Aristarchan or not, and therefore if the source for the scholion can be traced back to Aristarchus' own edition or some later work. However, before any such machine-learning model could exist, some manual work had to be done in order to have a sample set of scholia which are defined as Aristarchan or post Aristarchan. That is, the model needed something from which to learn. Thus my next step, upon gathering all of these features, was to collect a random sample of 100 scholia from the main, intermarginal, and interior zones, read each one and assign it a classification based on the language and features it contained. 

During this manual classification process, it quickly became apparent that this task was not as simple or clear-cut as it first appeared. There are many scholia which are difficult or even impossible to classify with the binary distinction of Aristarchan or post-Aristarchan. This is because, as demonstrated above, I have a limited set of features which hint that a scholion is Aristarchan or not. However, this by no means indicates that these are the only markers of Aristarchan and post-Aristarchan language. That is, just because a scholion does not contain γράφει and ὅτι, this does not mean I can definitively say it is not Aristarchan. Nor, however, can I claim it is definitively post-Aristarchan if it does not contain any of the post-Aristarchan features. Because of the many scholia which contained nothing to cause me to lean one way or the other, I created a third label, "indeterminate."

When I initially began labeling these scholia, I had not yet broken Aristarchus himself out of the post-Aristarchan topic. However, upon observing that the vast majority of strictly post-Aristarchan names appeared in the main scholia, I decided that those names should be contained in their own topic, separate from just Aristarchus. Upon this extra division, I decided to split the post-Aristarchan category into two sets: post Aristarchan and Aristarchan paraphrase. I defined an Aristarchan paraphrase as a scholion which mentions Aristarchus or his editions, but no other later editor. That is, they are explicitly referenced reworkings of his editions. If a scholion references both Aristarchus and a later editor, I chose to classify it as post-Aristarchan. Thus each one of the 100 randomly selected scholia has one of these four labels. The indeterminate label was the most frequently assigned out of all (38/100), followed closely by Aristarchan (36). The paraphrase and post-Aristarchan labels are are about evenly matched in this list. In this way, this manual classification provided me with a reasonable number of scholia which fall into each of these four categories.  

The next step was to take this set of manually labeled scholia and use it as a training set for a machine-learning model. That is, using machine learning, it was possible to create an Aristarchan identifier which uses the features I clustered together and the labels I assigned to the random set of scholia. The method employed here was decision tree learning. As explained by Spark, decision trees "are popular methods for the machine learning tasks of classification." Moreover, within a model, "each partition is chosen greedily by selecting the best split from a set of possible splits, in order to maximize the information gain at a tree node." More simply, the model learns from the data provided (in this case, my manually classified set of scholia), and creates its own model that "splits" on certain variables (features). The goal, then, is to have a model which, when applied, can predict classifications accurately.

Professor Smith helped significantly in taking my manually classified set and creating a decision tree script which uses a generic Spark machine learning process. In this process, the manually-classified set was split into a training set and a test/evaluation set. That is, the model learns from the training set, and then creates a series of binary decisions in order to determine how to classify scholia depending on the features they do or do not contain. Next, this series of decisions is applied to the evaluation set. Through this method, it was possible to create a decision tree model that was up to 90% accurate when applied to the evaluation set. The next step in this process is to apply this model to the remaining 7900 scholia in my data set and obtain the statistics for how many scholia of each classification it can distinguish. 

Decision trees are especially useful because they are relatively easy to understand and to visualize. Here is a decision tree classification model created using Professor Smith's script, trained on my data: [model] (https://github.com/mwauke/seniorThesis/blob/master/data/aristarchanFeaturesData/decisionTreeModel.txt). As is clear here, the model can be seen as a series of "if" statements. This model has a depth of 5 and has 25 nodes. The depth of a decision tree refers to the length of the longest path in between a "leaf" (in this case, a classification), and the root. In my conclusion, the next chapter, I will discuss some short-comings of this model, as well as some possible future options for creating an even better classifier. 

So far, none of this data has revealed that certain scholia zones are reserved for one specific purpose or source and nothing else. Nor was this the aim or hypothesis of this thesis. However, the data do suggest more generally which zones are more likely to contain certain types of comments. From these results, it appears that both Aristarchan scholia and post-Aristarchan scholia fall in the main zone. However, scholia which directly mention Aristarchus are most often in the intermarginal zone. The interior zone's distributions are often similar to those of the intermarginal, but usually slightly less extreme. In working with this decision tree, I at one point added in scholia zone as a feature to determine if this helped with classification. However, when this was added to the list of features, the ensuing decision tree model was actually less accurate. Thus, once again, scholia zone is not a satisfactory enough feature for determining source. Further, the features that I have identified are more accurate for predicting source.

With this model and the results in mind, I will in the next chapter lay out the conclusion which I am able to gather from the analyses I have conducted throughout this thesis, as well as possible future avenues for continued research.

