## Conclusions

There were many steps that I had to take in order to arrive at this point, with a working Aristarchan identifier. These steps range from preparing and cleaning up the data set so that it was possible to be analyzed (Methodology, chapter 2), to writing countless scripts in order to obtain countless tables of data to sort through (chapters 3 and 4). However, I hope that I have made it clear how necessary these different processes were. The more or less semester-long task of preparing the data-set was invaluable for all of the analyses I ran. Moreover, the only way to discern patterns is to have enough data for there to be discernible patterns. 

Through the analyses I have conducted during this thesis, related in the previous two chapters, I have recognized several features within the scholia which indicate that a scholion's language directly from Aristarchus. Moreover, I have also been able to identify features which indicate that a scholion comes from after Aristarchus. These post-Aristarchan scholia can be either paraphrases of Aristarchan material, or scholia which reference editors who flourished after Aristarchus. With the use of the HMT's digital editions of the Venetus A, I was able to find and extract information for nearly any feature of the scholia that I was interested in learning more about. There are many features which I did not choose to extract in my Aristarchan language analysis which undoubtedly would prove to be useful in some other analysis. Thus this process of analyzing scholia as collections of features is hopefully one which future scholars can employ when working the the HMT's editions of the scholia.

Because of the seemingly endless amount of features from which I could choose to extract, one of the most difficult problems I encountered was determining which features would be most significant in my effort to recover Aristarchan material in the manuscript. 
As I have demonstrated, the only way to settle on a finite list of features was to observe the general patterns which appear across the books of scholia. Moreover, before embarking on this thesis, I had a general idea of what types of language occurred together with Aristarchan critical signs. This knowledge gave me a small set of features from which I was then able to expand and finalize. 

Thus, my ultimate set of Aristarchan and non-Aristarchan features came to be a collection of various types of information that I was able to obtain from the digital editions. The presence of corresponding critical signs, different patterns of language, and personal names were all features which the Homer Multitext project’s editions marked and which I simply needed to extract. The topic modeling results required slightly more work to obtain, but ultimately derived from the HMT’s editions as well. By combining all of these features for every scholion in the main, intermarginal, and interior zones,  I was able to create a list of scholia which showed how Aristarchan or post-Aristarchan each scholion was, based on the cluster of features I had defined. However, I did not set some arbitrary identifier (e.g. 2 Aristarchan features means conclusively Aristarchus) to label the scholia as Aristarchan or not. Rather, after manually classifying a random set of scholia, a decision tree model was able to provide a clear illustration of the series of decisions taken when examining the features of a scholion to predict its class (Aristarchan, paraphrase, post-Aristarchan, indeterminate).

With all of the data I gathered and features I clustered together, I have made significant progress toward being able to identify, through a machine-learning model, scholia which contain Aristarchan language directly from his no longer extant editions. The scholia which appear to contain true Aristarchan language seem to most frequently appear in the main scholia. The main scholia, the largest scholia zone, is not reserved only for Aristarchan material, however. Scholia which reference post-Aristarchan editors also most frequently appear in the main zone as well. However, as the topic modeling results suggested, the scholia which directly reference Aristarchus show up significantly more in the intermediate, and to a lesser degree, interior zones. These observations point towards Aristarchan and post-Aristarchan sources being used as the sources for the main scholia and reworkings and paraphrases of Aristarchus’ editions being the sources for the intermarginal and interior zones. However, as I explained in the previous chapter, the scholia zones, although connected to the sources, are not the best method for predicting the source material for scholia. That is, there are many other factors, such as the features I have identified, which indicate source with more accuracy. 

As I explained in the introduction, at the time of the construction of the Venetus A, the editions of the Alexandrian editors were already not extant. However, it is likely that selections of their editions were copied, and thus some of the scholia which are in the Venetus A are direct transmissions from Aristarchus’ edition from the 2nd century BC. Only through this systematic, large-scale analysis of the recurring features in the scholia was it possible to gain a sense of the different types of comments which appear in the manuscript and how they are distributed. In this thesis, I have not identified every scholion which contains Aristarchan language. Rather, I have created a model for identifying which scholia are more likely Aristarchan, Aristarchan paraphrases, and post-Aristarchan. With this Aristarchan classifier, I have demonstrated that it is possible to recover some directly Aristarchan material, despite his edition being long gone. In addition, I have shown how these different sources are distributed among the various scholia zones. Through this work, I have attempted to respond to the scholars who, over the centuries, have lamented the dearth of information concerning the sources for the Venetus A manuscript.

Looking forward, this is by no means the end-point of scholarship on the source material for the scholia of the Venetus A. The work I have done lends itself easily to continued research. The most obvious way to extend this work is to continue the analysis on an expanded data set. As always, a larger data set is more desirable. Thus, once all of the scholia in the Venetus A has been edited by the HMT, I would like for the Aristarchan identifier model to be applied to this whole set. With this larger data set, and with continued research and analysis, more features which are useful for identifying Aristarchan or post-Aristarchan material could possibly become apparent. These features could then be incorporated into the model, making it a more accurate predictor of source material for scholia.

Beyond just expanding upon the existing decision tree model, it would also be beneficial to try different machine learning models. As I mentioned in the previous chapter, decision trees are useful because they are easy to interpret and understand just by looking at them. However, they are not perfect in all respects. One possible model to try next would be a random forest, in which several decision trees are made. With many decision trees created at the same time, the model created would in theory be more accurate when applied to the whole data set, as it would not be "fit" to just one training set, but would rather be trained on many different sets. At the moment, I am most familiar with plain decision trees. However, I am certain that testing out other methods would yield interesting and possibly more accurate models for classification.

Another area which I would like to explore further is the four classifications which I created for identifying source type. It might prove interesting, after applying the decision tree model to all 8000 scholia, to run topic models on each of these classification sets. For example, I would like to know if there appear to be distinct topics withing the post-Aristarchan classification. Distinct topics would point toward the possibility of their being different post-Aristarchan sources from which the scribe drew. More specifically, the results of such a topic model might suggest patterns of language or groupings of scholars which show up together and thus indicate distinct sources. This could be especially interesting when keeping in my the subscriptions written after several books in the manuscript which reference Didymus, Aristonicus, Nicanor, and Herodian as the sources for the scholia. Thus once more analysis has been devoted to the post-Aristarchan class, it would perhaps be a worthwhile pursuit to examine if it is possible to isolate content from these sources. I cannot say for sure whether this would be a feasible task. There was a clear starting point from which to work when approaching Aristarchan material, due to the Venetus A's inclusion of critical signs. Nevertheless, it would undoubtedly be interesting to see how much of the scholia comes from its only attributed sources, and where these scholia are located within the zones of the manuscript. 

When I began this thesis, I knew that I wanted to gain a better understanding of the source material for the scholia of the Venetus A. Moreover, I knew that the most obvious approach would be through examining Aristarchan material. However, beyond this, my vision of how this research would progress was unclear. I had a series of questions about phenomena and patterns I had noticed in the scholia over the past few years. These questions and observations ended up being an early version of the list of features I eventually ended up extracting from the scholia in order to determine Aristarchan content. However, it was not until I had a workable data set that I was able to actually envision how I could realistically analyze scholia as a set of features and use these features in a meaningful way.

Ultimately, with the results of this research, I have shown that despite insufficient citations and no-longer extant sources, it is still possible, in the 21st century, to recover some of the 2nd century B.C.E material for a 10th century C.E. manuscript. Moreover, I have shown that this sort of classification can be done on a large scale. Although my initial classification was on a limite set of scholia, the model that learned from it can be applied to the thousands of scholia in the Venetus A manuscript. Thus with this work, I have added to the understanding of the transmission of Aristarchus' editions in the over one millennium span from when he was working at the library of Alexandria to the construction of the Venetus A manuscript. 
