


##Introduction and Background

This thesis concerns the tenth-century Venetus A manuscript, the oldest complete manuscript of the *Iliad*. It contains not only the text of the poem, but scholarly commentary, or scholia, as well. These scholia surround the Iliadic text and provide notes on subjects such as grammar and mythology. {>> Before we can even say "before the larger questions," though, we need to identify those.  Lay out here what big questions you *will* address:  then feel free to defer answering them. <<}However, before delving into the people and works referenced in the scholia, the larger questions of this thesis, we need to introduce some background on the Venetus A and Homeric epics.

First, we must understand the origin and transmission of the poems. The origins of the Homeric epics, the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, have long been a subject of debate among scholars. Some, such as Martin West, maintain that these poems were written by one single poet. Many scholars who subscribe to this theory believe that “the artistry, cohesiveness, and sheer monumentality of the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*...prove that such marvels of artistic achievement must have required the technology of writing” (Nagy 30).

However, other scholars believe that the Homeric epics were originally orally composed rather than written. This is a theory which has existed for centuries, and which has continued to gather evidence to support it. In his 1795 *Prolegomena to Homer*, Friedrich Wolf proposes the possibility that the Iliad “and other poems of those times were not consigned to writings, but were first made by poets in their memories and made public in song, then made more widely available by the singing of the rhapsodes” (Wolf 69). Wolf uses this theory to explain the “many differences” among the written forms of the Homeric epics. The 1930s fieldwork of Milman Parry and Albert Lord provide more information on the logistics of oral composition. In *The Singer of Tales*, Lord explains how by observing bards in Yugoslavia, he and Parry were able to witness the process of oral composition in performance. As Lord describes it, “All singers use traditional material in a traditional way, but no two singers use exactly the same material in exactly the same way” (Lord 63). In this way, bards in Yugoslavia and bards in ancient Greece worked from traditional frameworks, but each gave their own unique telling.

In *Homeric Questions*, Gregory Nagy continues with this theory. He argues that it is misleading to use the phrase “Homer wrote” when discussing these epics because of both their oral nature and their lack of a single author (Nagy 27). He also proposes a timeline of the composition and transmission of the epics, with the poems being a product of pure oral tradition beginning in the second millennium B.C. and extending to the middle of the first millennium. It was at this point which point they began to interact with writing, eventually transitioning to a completely written format (Nagy 42).

In this introduction, I have given significantly more attention to this oral theory of the origin of the Homeric epics, as the evidence for it far outweighs the arguments against it. Regardless of one’s opinion on the original composition of the *Iliad*, it is clear that it was eventually written down. Nagy records that the written versions of the Iliad most likely began in the middle of the sixth century B.C (Nagy 42). Just as the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey* are now considered foundational works of western literature, so too were they revered in the classical and Hellenistic periods. The *Iliad* received an extraordinary amount of study, with scholars creating their own commentaries and editions. Three specific editors, Zenodotus, Aristophanes, and Aristarchus, who were at different times the heads of the library of Alexandria, are frequently referenced in the scholia of the Venetus A.

The editions of these editors are unfortunately not extant, and have not been for quite some time. As Wolf notes, at the time the scholiast of the Venetus A was working, "the recensions and interpretations of the leading critics...no longer circulated among the learned in complete form" (Wolf 172). Thus even references to these editors in the scholia are likely taken from other scholars' works on the Alexandrian editors' editions. Wolf laments that "there is not enough left even of those major critics from whose authority our text was first derived to permit us to understand their abilities or their methods of emendation" (172).

As stated previously, the Venetus A contains both Iliadic text and commentary in the form of scholia. In order to determine what line or phrase a scholion is discussing, the system of lemmata is used throughout this manuscript. In this system, many scholia begin with a lemma, a few words which refer to the line on which the scholion focuses. "This lemma," Mary Ebbott explains, "is often the very word or words being explained or commented on in the [commentary], though it does not  always correspond exactly—the lemma at its most basic level indicates the line (there were no line numbers to use) and is an aid for the reader" (Due 43). Thus this system allows the reader to more easily find the word or phrase which is being discussed in the comment. However, this is not the only way in which the comments are anchored to the text of the *Iliad*.

Throughout the manuscript, there are often symbols written to the left of certain lines of the *Iliad*. These are referred to as “critical signs.” As Bird notes in his section on critical signs in *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy*, “critical signs are not unique to Venetus A, although they are more fully used in it than in any other surviving Greek manuscript” (Due 95). Often, a sign will appear next to a line, and the corresponding scholion will explain why the sign was placed there. That is, these signs indicate that there is a comment in the margin about something related to the marked line. There are also different possible types of signs, with each type giving a general indication of the category of the comment. Further, it should be understood that critical signs are by no means present for every line on which there is a scholion. That is, there are many lines which have scholia commenting on them but do not have a critical sign.

In the preface to his edition of Homeric scholia, Karl Wilhelm Dindorf explains that these critical signs are unique to Aristarchus (*Nam Aristarchus his solum signis usus erat*, Dindorf XIX). That is, Aristarchus himself used these signs in his editions and commentaries (Due 90). As I mentioned above, there are several different types of signs, each with their own meaning: the diple indicates that there is some interesting use of language in the line; the obelos indicates that Aristarchus athetized the line as "unworthy of the poet's splendor" (Wolf 202); the dotted diple indicates that Zenodotus' reading was different from Aristarchus'; the asterisk indicates that the line appears somewhere else as well (Due 92-3). Wolf's explanation of Aristarchus' many atheteses and editorial choices was that his task was not "emending the text to consider what Homer sang, but what he ought to have sung" (Wolf 204).

##The Question

With this background of the Homeric tradition and the Venetus A manuscript completed, we can now move on to the larger questions whcih this thesis will address. The content of the scholia appear to draw from a variety of sources. At the end of several books of the Iliad in the Venetus A, there is a subscription which reads "Alongside the text lie the Signs of Aristonicus, and Didymus’ work On the Edition of Aristarchus, as well as some things from the Prosody of Herodian and Nicanor’s On Punctuation." (translation from Due 7)

Thus, as Due explains, "many of the scholia are derived from the work of these four Homeric scholars from antiquity" (Due 7). However, these sources do not account for all of the content in the scholia. Myriam Hecquet, in her chapter on the codicology and palaeography of the manuscript in *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy*, poses several questions concerning the material the scribe was using, such as "Where did he find his exemplars?" and "Were these commentaries already arranged together, or did the scribe excerpt and arrange them together himself for this manuscript?" (Due 74). In response to these questions, Hecquet asserts that "scholars are reduced to hypotheses, to conjectures based on observations of the copy" (Due 74).

{>> This is what we need to get into the first paragraph of the introduction, as your phrasing of this sentence suggests! <<}Thus it is this question of sources for the scholia which this thesis wishes to address. Even with the subscription provided in the manuscript, there is still no key which informs the reader from what source a specific scholion derives. This problem of citation and source material is one which is less frequent in contemporary scholarship, as current guidelines require that authors cite every source they use when composing a given work. The fear of plagiarism accusations and the desire to give credit to past scholars guarantee that authors provide footnotes and bibliographies. As a result, readers can then learn the source materials from which authors derive their information. Moreover, the standards for citation are much stricter now than they were in centuries past. While it is now unacceptable to quote another author without providing a precise reference to the page number of the work from which the words were taken, this was a common practice in ancient literature. At that time, there were not standard editions of works with set reference numbers. Thus the concept of precise and consistent citation as we have it today is relatively new.

Another difficulty that arises in scholarship on ancient sources is the prevalence of references to no longer extant works. In the current era, if someone does not cite a quote or idea, it is relatively easy to track down the source using simple internet search methods. However, sometimes even when an ancient author attributes a quote to another work, it is not guaranteed that the text still exists at all. For example, although Plutarch names Cratinus’ play *The Chirons* when providing a quote about Pericles’ bizarrely-shaped head, this play is now lost to us. Thus we have no way of reading the context of the quote and learning more about the source. This can be incredibly frustrating at times, as we are unable to gain a fuller understanding of what exact texts authors and editors consulted. Wolf, as he discusses the lost sources, complains that "the readings and emendations of [the Alexandrian editors] and others were excerpted with varying intentions by many hands and scattered through dictionaries, commentaries, and scholia" (172). It is with these difficulties in mind which we turn to the question of the source material for different content within the scholia of the Venetus A.

We know that there are different, content-specific zones for the scholia of the Venetus A. This difference in content likely indicates different sources. By analyzing different features of the scholia, we can gain a better understanding of differences in content and thus these different sources. One such feature to examine is topic modeling results, which will reveal different categories of content. Other features to examine together with this are references to editors in the scholia and the presence of Aristarchan critical signs. Through an analysis of different features of the scholia, specific topics may become apparent which can be linked to separate sources.

Before going further into the analysis method of the different features of the scholia, I must also address the different types of scholia. Within the Venetus A, there are different zones in which the scholia can fall: main, interior, intermarginal, interlinear, and exterior. There has been no definitive explanation of the placement of scholia within different zones. That is, nowhere is it laid out precisely why one comment belongs in the intermarginal zone rather than the main. Using topic modeling, this question can be approached more systematically.


## Method

A topic model is a means of identifying patterns of text within a corpus. The theory behind latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic modeling is that each corpus has a set of topics which can be discerned by analyzing recurring patterns of co-occurring words. Thomas Koentges created ToPan, an LDA topic modeling software which allows the user to enter a corpus and the number of topics (k-value) they wish to be identified. When uploading the corpus, the user indicates how it is to be split up or “chunked.” For example, if one wanted to run a topic model on a novel, they might use the chapters as individual chunks. Another important piece of information the user must provide is a “stop-word list.” This is a list of words which the user views as insignificant for analysis, such as very common words like “the” or “and.” These words are exluded from the topic model and thus do not clutter up the topics. With this information provided, ToPan generates the specified number of topics. The user then examines the words in each topic and assigns them human-readable labels. Moreover, each chunk of text within the corpus also receives a weight for each topic. Thus, the user is then able to see which sections (chunks) of the text relate most to which topics.

I ran a topic model on eighteen books of scholia in the Venetus A, using fifteen topics and 5000 iterations. Individual scholia served as the chunks of text. The most immediately apparent observation was that there was a clear split between editorial topics and Iliadic topics. Editorial topics are those which focus heavily on grammar, punctuation, and accentuation. The Iliadic topics are those which focus more on the content of the Iliad, with themes such as “genealogy” and “battle.” Within the editorial topics, one of the clearest topics was one which focused on Aristarchus. There was another topic which also featured the Alexandrian editors, but this particular topic seemed specific to Aristarchus.

In order to explore this further, I examined the scholia within the Aristarchus topic which had a weight of .9 or above. That is, I extracted the scholia which correlated most strongly to the Aristarchus topic. I then looked at their distribution among the different types of scholia. Of the 225 scholia with a .9 or greater weight within this topic, 133 (nearly 60 %)  fell in the intermarginal zone. For reference, in the manuscript as a whole, 45% of all scholia are main scholia, and 15% are intermarginal. This is a significant difference in distribution. While this does not mean that comments which reference Aristarchus fall only in the intermarginal, or that intermarginal scholia are reserved for content from Aristarchus, it does provide more information about content variation among the different types of scholia.

Specifically, this observations shows that zones do appear to have distinct content, even if it is not yet solidified what exactly the distinctions are. Moreover, this content is most likely related to sources. The fact that the Aristarchus topic was so clear and had so many scholia strongly correlated to it indicates that these scholia are likely coming from an Aristarchan source. The success of this topic modeling observation shows that one can use topic model results as a feature in analysis. However, before going any further, we must understand the nature and implication of topic modeling results.

There is a certain level of randomness in topic modeling. That is, even if one were to run several topic models on the same corpus, keeping the same parameters each time (e.g. k-value, number of iterations), the resulting topics would not be identical. However, this does not mean that topic modeling results are unreliable or wholly unreplicable. While the exact same words within each topic will not reappear, the same general themes should come out when running multiple topic models with constant parameters. For example, other trials of topic models with fifteen topics and 5000 iterations on the scholia of eighteen books of the Venetus A reveal not identical, but similar types of topics. The divide between editorial and Iliadic topics is apparent each time, and many of the “stronger” topics, such as the Aristarchus topic, tend to come out. However, the individual words within each topic do not remain constant. Thus while there is variability among the topic modeling results, they do represent definite patterns which are present in the corpus. One way to show replicability more statistically would be to run a series of topic models with constant parameters. Then, after identifying a topic of interest (e.g. the Aristarchus Topic), one would see in how many runs this topic was recognizable. The next step would then be to examine the distribution of the weights of scholia within this topic across each run. With this data, one could see more easily and objectively the strength of this topic over multiple topic model runs. The analysis of topic modeling results along with other features such as presence of critical signs and references to Alexandrian editors can shed more light on the sources for the scholia. That is, patterns among these features might indicate common sources.

It is my hope that representing thousands of scholia as a set of features that they do or do not contain will make analysis simpler. Each question will simply be a matter of extracting the scholia which have the specific combinations of features I wish to investigate.

---

This thesis relies on the digital editions of the Venetus A manuscript created by members of the Homer Multitext project. The goal of the Homer Multitext project (HMT) is “to present the Homeric *Iliad* and *Odyssey* in a critical framework that accounts for the fact that these poems were composed orally over the course of hundreds, if not thousands of years by countless singers who composed in performance” (HMT website). Because of this philosophy and the complexity of the manuscripts from which the HMT work, they must use digital technologies in order to create their editions.

Moreover it is precisely the digital format of these editions which is most crucial to this thesis, as it is what makes any sort of large-scale analysis on the scholia possible. There are around 10,000 scholia in the Venetus A altogether. Previous scholars of the manuscript simply did not have the proper tools to make definitive claims on certain aspects of the manuscript due to the density of information it contains. Thus, even if a scholar were to notice a pattern which appeared in ten different places, they still would not easily be able to know how that pattern was distributed across the manuscript as a whole. That is, previous work was, by necessity, largely anecdotal.

A more thorough background on the HMT editions of the Venetus A is necessary for understanding the analytical process. One important feature of the HMT is the level of division within the editions. Not only are there separate XML documents for each book of the Venetus A, but the Iliadic text and the scholia are also separated. Going another step further, there are separate documents for each scholia type. Thus each text-group is self contained and can be analyzed separately.

The HMT attempts to faithfully represent exactly what appears on the page of the manuscript. Thus, if the scribe did not include an accent or breathing mark on a word, the edition does not contain it either. Beyond this, the HMT uses a limited set of TEI markup when editing the XML text of the *Iliad* and the scholia. These features which are tagged in TEI markup provie more information about the text as it appears in the manuscript. One such feature which can be recorded through this markup is alternate readings within the text. Alternate readings can take a variety of forms, including abbreviations and corrections. When there is an abbreviation in the manuscript, the edition records the exact letters which are written. In addition, the edition also provides the likely expansion of the word. These two words are recorded next to each other, with the former wrapped in an &lt;abbr> tag, and the latter in an &lt;expan> tag. Both of these words are then wrapped in a single &lt;choice> tag, which indicates that they represent different encodings for the same word. Similarly, when the scribe corrects himself in the manuscript by crossing out an accent mark or noticably changing a letter, the &lt;sic>/&lt;corr> pairing is used. What appears to be the first recording of the word is the "sic," while the corrected version of the word is the "corr." Once again, both of these words are grouped together by the element "choice." The existence of these alternate readings in the editions means that when conducting an analysis, one must choose which reading to include.

Another feature of the text which is pertinent to this thesis is the appearance of personal names. Each time any person is referenced in the Iliadic text or the scholia, they are tagged with a unique identifier. The HMT maintains a list of every person and place mentioned in the text along with their corresponding unique numerical idenifier. Thus, if one wanted to find every instance of Achilles, it would be as simple as searching for every instance of his identifier. This removes the difficulty posed by the various forms that nouns have in Ancient Greek, as well as the use of patronymics. It is this method of tagging personal names which allows me to systematically extract all the references to the Alexandrian editors throughout the scholia.

It is also important to note that the HMT has a separate document for recording critical signs. Because these are not part of the text, they are note included in the editions of the main text or scholia. Instead, occurrences of critical signs are recorded in a separate index which can also be used for analysis. The index of critical signs includes the specific type of critical sign as well as the *Iliad* line number it appears next to in the manuscript.

Using these digital editions of the scholia from the HMT archives, it was possible to create a model which identifies every semantically significant token and identifies several categories of information about each token. From this, it is possible to analyze the XML in terms of this model and thus have a workable data set from which I can extract the scholia which have features interesting to me.
